causal/01-ordering.rst, before:

========
Ordering
========

.. include:: <isotech.txt>
.. include:: <mmlalias.txt>

Data structures
===============

Partial orders
--------------

A `partial ordering`_ is a set of elements with a binary relation |le| that is
reflexive, antisymmetric, and transitive. It can be represented as a `directed
acyclic graph`_ (DAG), where nodes represent the elements, and paths represent
the relationships. Using this structure, we can begin to model messages in a
distributed system for a group communications session.

Each node m |in| M represents a message, sent by a sender u |in| U. [#Nsep]_
The relation a |le| b (a "before" b) means that the sender of b knew the
contents of a, when they wrote b. As a shortcut, let us also define |ge|
("after") such that a |ge| b |iff| b |le| a, and |perp| ("independent") such
that a |perp| b |iff| (¬ a |le| b |and| ¬ a |ge| b). Note that in a partial
order, ¬ (a |le| b) does *not* imply a |ge| b.

.. digraph:: relations

    rankdir=BT;
    node [height=0.5, width=0.5, style=filled, label=""];
    m [fillcolor="#ffffff", label="m"];
    p [fillcolor="#ff6666"];
    q [fillcolor="#ff6666"];
    s [fillcolor="#66ff66"];
    t [fillcolor="#66ff66"];
    x [fillcolor="#999999"];
    y [fillcolor="#999999"];
    z [fillcolor="#999999"];
    s -> m -> p;
    t -> m -> q;
    s -> x -> p;
    z -> q; t -> y;

In the diagram above, where an edge a |leftarrow| b means that a |le| b,

- red nodes (and m [#Nnat]_) are *before* m; all others are *not-before* m.
- green nodes (and m) are *after* m; all others are *not-after* m.
- grey nodes are neither before nor after m, but *causally independent* of it.

Since |le| is transitive, a |le| b means that the sender of b knows all
messages before a as well. (We'll talk about how to enforce this in a real
system soon.) As a shortcut, define **anc(m)** = {a | a |le| m}, i.e. the set
of ancestors of m, including m. This set can be interpreted as the possible
"causes" of m, like the discrete equivalent of a `light cone`_.

In our scheme, each message m declares its immediate predecessors P =
**pre(m)**. This defines a few relationships: |forall| p |in| P: p < m. (This
is why we drew |leftarrow| for |le| in the above graph, rather than
|rightarrow| - the references belong to the later message; one cannot predict
in advance what messages will come after yours.) *Immediate* means that there
is nothing between them, i.e. |NotExists| q: p < q < m. One result of this is
that all parents (from now on we'll exclusively use this term) must be causally
independent of each other ("form an `anti-chain`_").

Our definition means that pre(m) forms a `transitive reduction`_ of |le|. This
eliminates redundant information from the contents of a message. This is good,
because redundant information is a security liability - it needs to be checked
for consistency, from the "canonical" sources of the information, but then we
might as well use those sources to directly calculate this information. Here,
enforcing immediacy and independence actually lets us achieve some stronger
guarantees "for free" - e.g., protection against rewinding of vector clocks;
see next section.

References must be globally consistent and immutable - i.e. to see a reference
allows one to verify the message contents, and no-one can forge a different
message for which the reference is valid, not even the original sender. One
implementation option, is to broadcast the same authenticated-encrypted blob to
everyone, treat this blob as the content of the message, and use a hash of the
message as the reference. (Those familiar with Git will see the similarities
with their model of immutable commit objects.) [#Next]_

There are two ways to know a valid reference - deriving it from the message
contents, or seeing it elsewhere (e.g. in pre(m) of a child). In the latter
case, one might not have seen the message itself. Then, one could pretend that
one *has* seen it, by re-using the reference in an outgoing message. We assume
that people won't do this - there is no strategic benefit to claiming that you
know something that you are entitled to know but temporarily don't, and the
rest of the system is designed to ensure that you see it eventually. The worse
that can happen is that someone will issue a challenge you cannot answer, but
only your reputation suffers in this case. Also, if you haven't seen the
message, you are unable to verify that the reference is indeed valid, so
someone else might be trying to trick *you*.

.. _Partial ordering: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partially_ordered_set
.. _Transitive reduction: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transitive_reduction
.. _Directed acyclic graph: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph
.. _Anti-chain: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antichain
.. _Light cone: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Light_cone

.. [#Nsep] Some other systems treat send vs deliver (of each message m) as two
    separate events, but we don't do this for simplicity. The sender delivers m
    to itself *immediately* after they send it, so the system will never see an
    event that is after send[m] but not-after deliver[m]; nor an event that is
    before deliver[m] but not-before send[m].

.. [#Nnat] In natural language, |le| is really *before or equal to*. We say
    *before* here because that's shorter. We use |le| instead of < because that
    makes most formal descriptions shorter. Unless otherwise specified, we'll
    use *before* for |le| and *strictly before* for <, and likewise for *after*
    and |ge|.

.. [#Next] Possible extensions to this are discussed in the appendix. For
    example, we could instead hash(blob||decrypted-verified plaintext), using
    some definition for the plaintext that is the same for everyone. This
    ensures that only people who can read the plaintext can create a valid
    reference, but it's not clear whether this is such a big deal. TODO: move
    to appendix and discuss further.

Causal orders
-------------

We can do a lot of things already with just a partial order, but adding some
extra structure results in stronger guarantees and enables more complex
behaviours. We do not make immediate use of this extra structure, but we
introduce them now, to identify some intuitive properties missing from a
partial order, and so that you are familiar with them later.

In a causal ordering, each message is associated with exactly one *sender* and
a set of *recipients*, collectively called its *members*. Define **by(u)** as
the set of all messages sent by u. This set is totally-ordered on |le|, i.e.
every element is either before or after every other. Roughly, this constrains
the number of branches that may exist at any point, and helps the graph be
"more linear".

Often, we'll find it useful to refer to the subjective session-view that a
sender has when they send a message. Define **context(m)** as a mapping
members(m) |rightarrow| anc(m), such that context(m)(u) is the latest message
by u seen by the sender of m, or |bot| ("null") if no such message exists.
Formally:

context(m): members(m) |rightarrow| anc(m) = u |mapsto| max(by(u) |cap| anc(m))

where max() gives the maximum element of a totally-ordered set, or |bot| if it
is empty. We say a context c |sqsubset| c' ("strictly less advanced") iff
|forall| u: c(u) = |bot| |or| c(u) |le| c'(u) and c |ne| c'.

Unlike pre(m) and members(m), by(u) depends implicitly on the set of messages
that have been delivered so far, so might more accurately be denoted T.by(u),
where T is the current transcript. Though context(m) also refers to other
messages, any valid transcript that contains m must already contain anc(m) and
therefore context(m), so it is unambiguous regardless of the transcript.

Context is semantically equivalent to a `vector clock`_. As with vector clocks,
malicious senders may "rewind" the context they are supposed to declare with
each message. If this redundant information is trusted, this enables certain
re-ordering attacks. For example, I should not be allowed to claim that my
last-received-from-A is 9, if I've already claimed that my last-received-from-B
is 12, but in message 12, B claimed that their last-received-from-A is 10. (A
more simple version of this with only 2 members is in the diagram below.)

To protect against this, we introduce *context consistency*: all messages must
have a context that is strictly more advanced than the context of strictly
earlier messages. Or, in other words, a message may not declare a parent that
is before a parent of a strictly earlier message. Formally:

|forall| m', m |in| <: context(m') |sqsubset| context(m) (or equivalently)
|forall| p' |in| pre(m'), p |in| pre(m): ¬ p |le| p' (TODO: prove the equiv)

.. digraph:: freshness_consistency

    rankdir=RL;
    node [height=0.5, width=0.5];
    edge [weight=2];

    subgraph clusterA {
        label="by(A)";
        labeljust="r";
        2 -> 1;
        node [style=invis];
        r -> s -> 2 [style=invis];
    }

    subgraph clusterB {
        label="by(B)";
        labeljust="r";
        4 -> 3;
        node [style=invis];
        3 -> p -> q [style=invis];
    }

    edge [weight=1];
    3 -> 2;
    4 -> 1 [color="#ff0000", headport=se, tailport=nw];

Context consistency forbids the 1 |leftarrow| 4 reference. This may seem like
quite a complex property to enforce, but actually we do not need to directly
enforce it.

**Theorem**: *transitive reduction* entails *context consistency*. Proof
sketch: if m' < m then |exists| p |in| pre(m): m' |le| p < m. Since |le| is
transitive, |forall| p' |in| pre(m'): p' < p |equiv| anc(p') |subset| anc(p).
By transitive reduction, no other q |ne| p |in| pre(m) may belong to anc(p), so
q |notin| anc(p') |equiv| ¬ q |le| p' (for all p', q) as required. []

So, we recommend that a real implementation should not encode context(m)
explicitly, since it generally has redundant information that will need to be
checked. Instead, one should enforce that pre(m) is an anti-chain (see below),
which automatically achieves context consistency. Then, one may locally
calculate context(m) from pre(m), using the following recursive algorithm:
TODO: write this and link to the appendix.

.. _Vector clock: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vector_clock

Invariants
----------

Let us summarise the invariants on our data structure.

- |le| is reflexive:

  |forall| a: a |le| a

- |le| is anti-symmetric:

  |forall| a, b: a |le| b |and| b |le| a |implies| a = b

- |le| is transitive:

  |forall| a, b, c: a |le| b |and| b |le| c |implies| a |le| c

- pre(m) is an anti-chain and forms a transitive reduction of |le|:

  |forall| m: |forall| p, p' |in| pre(m): p |perp| p'

  as above, this entails context consistency

- by(u) is a chain / total-order:

  |forall| u: |forall| m, m' |in| by(u): m |le| m' |or| m' |le| m

Enforcement
===========

Reflexivity and anti-symmetry do not need special protocol-level behaviour to
enforce; implementations might check their own correctness with unit tests.

Enforcing transitivity means we must show messages to the user in `topological
order`_. For each incoming m, if any of its parents p |in| pre(m) have not yet
been delivered [#Ndlv]_, we place m in a buffer, and wait for all of pre(m) to
be delivered first before delivering m. This allows us to verify that the
parent references are actually of real messages. To protect against DoS, the
buffer should be limited in size; see the next section for details.

The result is that we deliver all of anc(m) before we deliver m, i.e. the user
sees anc(m) before m. This applies for messages the user sends too, assuming we
set the parents correctly. This achieves transitivity on the local side, but it
is quite hard to detect whether *other* members are doing this. (One option is
to require m to mention *all* of anc(m), but obviously this costs too much
bandwidth.) But earlier, we argued that there is no incentive for users to
cheat this; we will make this assumption going forward.

Enforcing transitive reduction can be done using only information from m and
anc(m). Since messages are only added to the data structure in topological
order, everyone has this information so they can enforce it themselves.
Messages that break this may simply be dropped, with a local UI warning as to
the source. The :ref:`merge algorithm for DAGs <merge-algorithm>` includes a
check that the inputs form an anti-chain, and it may be run on the pre(m) of
every message accepted, including for single-parent messages.

Enforcing total ordering can be done only when someone accepts messages from
both forks, which not everyone else might see. To help this propagate, users
that see this condition, must re-broadcast all messages within both forks to
everyone else, then leave the conversation with a BAIL error message (TODO:
elaborate possible errors) that references both forks. Note that one of the
references may have to be indirect if we already replied to the other fork, to
preserve transitive reduction. We should never need to do this for a triple
fork; bail should be immediate upon attempting to deliver a double fork. It is
not essential that everyone receives this, since lack of future participation
will indicate that something is wrong, but this helps to narrow down the cause.

.. _Topological order: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Topological_sort

.. [#Ndlv] Here, "deliver" is standard distributed-systems terminology, and
    means to make the message available to higher layers for subsequent
    operations, such as displaying in a UI. However, in messaging contexts,
    "deliver" might be confused to mean "remote completion of a send", e.g. as
    in "delivery receipt"; so sometimes we'll use the term "accept" instead.

Detecting transport attacks
---------------------------

By "transport attacks", we mean replays, re-orders, and drops of packets, by an
attacker that can affect the physical communications infrastructure. We assume
that external cryptographic authentication will allow us to detect packets
injected by a non-member.

Detecting replays is easy, assuming that our decryption scheme verify-decrypts
duplicate packets so that they have the same parents (and contents and other
metadata); then this will be deserialised into an already-existing node in our
transcript graph. If we cache the ciphertext (and there is :ref:`reason to
<reliability>`), we don't even need to verify-decrypt it the second time.

Enforcing transitivity is basically an exercise in correcting the order of
messages, so we are already covered there.

For drops, let's consider "causal drops" first - drops of messages that caused
(are *before*) a message we *have* already received. Messages in the delivery
buffer will have three types of parents: those already accepted, those also in
the buffer, and those that haven't been seen yet. For the last case, this is
either because the parent p doesn't exist (the sender is lying), or because the
transport is being unreliable or malicious.

We don't assume the transport is reliable, so we should give it a grace period
within which to expect p to arrive. After this expires, we should assume that
we'll never receive p for whatever reason, emit a UI warning ("referenced
message p didn't arrive on time"), and drop messages that transitively point to
p from the buffer. This is safe even if p turns out to be real and we receive
it later; others' :ref:`reliability <reliability>` schemes will detect this and
resend us the dropped messages. If we do eventually receive p later, we should
cancel the warning, or at least downgrade its severity, based on how timely we
expect the transport to be.

If we never receive p, we cannot know *for sure* whether the sender was lying
or the transport was malicious. In the basic case, there is no incentive for
the sender to lie, but if we just *assume* the transport is malicious (and take
some action A in response to this) then ironically we *give* the sender an
incentive to lie - they can frame the transport to induce us to do A, which may
have unintended consequences. So, we should be careful in how we communicate
this fault to the user, and not imply blame on any party.

Detecting *non-causal drops* - drops of messages not-before a message we've
already received, and therefore we don't see any references to - is more
complex, and we will cover this in :doc:`freshness <03-freshness>`.

If the first message has replay protection (e.g. if it is fresh), we also
inductively gain this for the entire session. This is because each message
contains unforgeable references to previous parent messages, so everything is
"anchored" to the first non-replayable message.

Disadvantages of buffering
--------------------------

Withholding some messages even though they are available to deliver without
their ancestors, may seem like bad user experience. However, delivering them
like this sacrifices ordering and changes the original context of the message.
[#Nhld]_ As mentioned previously, our threat model is that this may be critical
for security; another interpretation is that messages without their ancestors
*are not* what the sender intended, so it doesn't even make any semantic sense
to deliver them. Our resend mechanisms should also reduce the cases in practise
where we must buffer messages.

One interface option is to show a "messages received out-of-order" notice. If
you really must display their contents, you must do this separately from the
main conversation interface, activated manually, and with a strong warning on
the consequences of reading them - they may be fake messages, do not reply to
them, etc etc. TODO: explore this further, with the requirements of SMS.

TODO: more arguments around causal ordering and buffering
- "display immediately" strategy only guarantees to "1-level parent only"; rest of history forgeable
- buffering can be invisible to end-user, so no visible degradation (weak point though)

.. [#Nhld] One major problem is we effectively break transitivity of the parent
    references. By which we mean, even if you somehow implement |le| despite
    having incomplete anc(m) and it passes transitivity tests, semantically
    this will not be true, so your representation will not reflect reality.
    Although these properties may seem abstract and not important to security,
    other more concrete properties that we elaborate on in further chapters,
    depend on them.

Commit message:

- remove filler text and add some more notes for consistency

causal/01-ordering.rst, after:

========
Ordering
========

.. include:: <isotech.txt>
.. include:: <mmlalias.txt>

Data structures
===============

Partial orders
--------------

A `partial ordering`_ is a set of elements with a binary relation |le| that is
reflexive, antisymmetric, and transitive. It can be represented as a `directed
acyclic graph`_ (DAG), where nodes represent the elements, and paths represent
the relationships. Using this structure, we can begin to model messages in a
distributed system for a group communications session.

Each node m |in| M represents a message, sent by a sender u |in| U. [#Nsep]_
The relation a |le| b (a "before" b) means that the sender of b knew the
contents of a, when they wrote b. As a shortcut, let us also define |ge|
("after") such that a |ge| b |iff| b |le| a, and |perp| ("independent") such
that a |perp| b |iff| (¬ a |le| b |and| ¬ a |ge| b). Note that in a partial
order, ¬ (a |le| b) does *not* imply a |ge| b.

.. digraph:: relations

    rankdir=BT;
    node [height=0.5, width=0.5, style=filled, label=""];
    m [fillcolor="#ffffff", label="m"];
    p [fillcolor="#ff6666"];
    q [fillcolor="#ff6666"];
    s [fillcolor="#66ff66"];
    t [fillcolor="#66ff66"];
    x [fillcolor="#999999"];
    y [fillcolor="#999999"];
    z [fillcolor="#999999"];
    s -> m -> p;
    t -> m -> q;
    s -> x -> p;
    z -> q; t -> y;

In the diagram above, where an edge a |leftarrow| b means that a |le| b,

- red nodes (and m [#Nnat]_) are *before* m; all others are *not-before* m.
- green nodes (and m) are *after* m; all others are *not-after* m.
- grey nodes are neither before nor after m, but *causally independent* of it.

Since |le| is transitive, a |le| b means that the sender of b knows all
messages before a as well. (We'll talk about how to enforce this in a real
system soon.) As a shortcut, define **anc(m)** = {a | a |le| m}, i.e. the set
of ancestors of m, including m. This set can be interpreted as the possible
"causes" of m, like the discrete equivalent of a `light cone`_.

In our scheme, each message m declares its immediate predecessors P =
**pre(m)**. This defines a few relationships: |forall| p |in| P: p < m. (This
is why we drew |leftarrow| for |le| in the above graph, rather than
|rightarrow| - the references belong to the later message; one cannot predict
in advance what messages will come after yours.) *Immediate* means that there
is nothing between them, i.e. |NotExists| q: p < q < m. One result of this is
that all parents (from now on we'll exclusively use this term) must be causally
independent of each other ("form an `anti-chain`_").

Our definition means that pre(m) forms a `transitive reduction`_ of |le|. This
eliminates redundant information from the contents of a message. This is good,
because redundant information is a security liability - it needs to be checked
for consistency, from the "canonical" sources of the information, but then we
might as well use those sources to directly calculate this information. Here,
enforcing immediacy and independence actually lets us achieve some stronger
guarantees "for free" - e.g., protection against rewinding of vector clocks;
see next section.

References must be globally consistent and immutable - i.e. to see a reference
allows one to verify the message contents, and no-one can forge a different
message for which the reference is valid, not even the original sender. One
implementation option, is to broadcast the same authenticated-encrypted blob to
everyone, treat this blob as the content of the message, and use a hash of the
message as the reference. (Those familiar with Git will see the similarities
with their model of immutable commit objects.) [#Next]_

There are two ways to know a valid reference - deriving it from the message
contents, or seeing it elsewhere (e.g. in pre(m) of a child). In the latter
case, one might not have seen the message itself. Then, one could pretend that
one *has* seen it, by re-using the reference in an outgoing message. We assume
that people won't do this - there is no strategic benefit to claiming that you
know something that you are entitled to know but temporarily don't, and the
rest of the system is designed to ensure that you see it eventually. The worse
that can happen is that someone will issue a challenge you cannot answer, but
only your reputation suffers in this case. Also, if you haven't seen the
message, you are unable to verify that the reference is indeed valid, so
someone else might be trying to trick *you*.

.. _Partial ordering: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partially_ordered_set
.. _Transitive reduction: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transitive_reduction
.. _Directed acyclic graph: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph
.. _Anti-chain: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antichain
.. _Light cone: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Light_cone

.. [#Nsep] Some other systems treat send vs deliver (of each message m) as two
    separate events, but we don't do this for simplicity. The sender delivers m
    to itself *immediately* after they send it, so the system will never see an
    event that is after send[m] but not-after deliver[m]; nor an event that is
    before deliver[m] but not-before send[m].

.. [#Nnat] In natural language, |le| is really *before or equal to*. We say
    *before* here because that's shorter. We use |le| instead of < because that
    makes most formal descriptions shorter. Unless otherwise specified, we'll
    use *before* for |le| and *strictly before* for <, and likewise for *after*
    and |ge|.

.. [#Next] Possible extensions to this are discussed in the appendix. For
    example, we could instead hash(blob||decrypted-verified plaintext), using
    some definition for the plaintext that is the same for everyone. This
    ensures that only people who can read the plaintext can create a valid
    reference, but it's not clear whether this is such a big deal. TODO: move
    to appendix and discuss further.

Causal orders
-------------

Partial orders can be used to describe the relative ordering of neutral events.
In a causal order, we introduce agents that can observe and generate events. In
the context of messaging, each event is a message with exactly one *sender* and
a set of *recipients*, collectively called its *members*. Define **by(u)** as
the set of all messages sent by u. This set is totally-ordered on |le|, i.e.
every element is either before or after every other. Roughly, this constrains
the number of branches that may exist at any point, and helps the graph be
"more linear".

Often, we'll find it useful to refer to the subjective session-view that a
sender has when they send a message. Define **context(m)** as a mapping
members(m) |rightarrow| anc(m), such that context(m)(u) is the latest message
by u seen by the sender of m, or |bot| ("null") if no such message exists.
Formally:

context(m): members(m) |rightarrow| anc(m) = u |mapsto| max(by(u) |cap| anc(m))

where max() gives the maximum element of a totally-ordered set, or |bot| if it
is empty. We say a context c |sqsubset| c' ("strictly less advanced") iff
|forall| u: c(u) = |bot| |or| c(u) |le| c'(u) and c |ne| c'.

Unlike pre(m) and members(m), by(u) depends implicitly on the set of messages
that have been delivered so far, so might more accurately be denoted T.by(u),
where T is the current transcript. Though context(m) also refers to other
messages, any valid transcript that contains m must already contain anc(m) and
therefore context(m), so it is unambiguous regardless of the transcript.

Context is semantically equivalent to a `vector clock`_. As with vector clocks,
malicious senders may "rewind" the context they are supposed to declare with
each message. If this redundant information is trusted, this enables certain
re-ordering attacks. For example, I should not be allowed to claim that my
last-received-from-A is 9, if I've already claimed that my last-received-from-B
is 12, but in message 12, B claimed that their last-received-from-A is 10. (A
more simple version of this with only 2 members is in the diagram below.)

To protect against this, we introduce *context consistency*: all messages must
have a context that is strictly more advanced than the context of strictly
earlier messages. Or, in other words, a message may not declare a parent that
is before a parent of a strictly earlier message. Formally:

|forall| m', m |in| <: context(m') |sqsubset| context(m) (or equivalently)
|forall| p' |in| pre(m'), p |in| pre(m): ¬ p |le| p' (TODO: prove the equiv)

.. digraph:: freshness_consistency

    rankdir=RL;
    node [height=0.5, width=0.5];
    edge [weight=2];

    subgraph clusterA {
        label="by(A)";
        labeljust="r";
        2 -> 1;
        node [style=invis];
        r -> s -> 2 [style=invis];
    }

    subgraph clusterB {
        label="by(B)";
        labeljust="r";
        4 -> 3;
        node [style=invis];
        3 -> p -> q [style=invis];
    }

    edge [weight=1];
    3 -> 2;
    4 -> 1 [color="#ff0000", headport=se, tailport=nw];

Context consistency forbids the 1 |leftarrow| 4 reference. This may seem like
quite a complex property to enforce, but actually we do not need to directly
enforce it.

**Theorem**: *transitive reduction* entails *context consistency*. Proof
sketch: if m' < m then |exists| p |in| pre(m): m' |le| p < m. Since |le| is
transitive, |forall| p' |in| pre(m'): p' < p |equiv| anc(p') |subset| anc(p).
By transitive reduction, no other q |ne| p |in| pre(m) may belong to anc(p), so
q |notin| anc(p') |equiv| ¬ q |le| p' (for all p', q) as required. []

So, we recommend that a real implementation should not encode context(m)
explicitly, since it generally has redundant information that will need to be
checked. Instead, one should enforce that pre(m) is an anti-chain (see below),
which automatically achieves context consistency. Then, one may locally
calculate context(m) from pre(m), using the following recursive algorithm:
TODO: write this and link to the appendix.

.. _Vector clock: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vector_clock

Invariants
----------

Let us summarise the invariants on our data structure.

- |le| is reflexive:

  |forall| a: a |le| a

- |le| is anti-symmetric:

  |forall| a, b: a |le| b |and| b |le| a |implies| a = b

- |le| is transitive:

  |forall| a, b, c: a |le| b |and| b |le| c |implies| a |le| c

- pre(m) is an anti-chain and forms a transitive reduction of |le|:

  |forall| m: |forall| p, p' |in| pre(m): p |perp| p'

  as above, this entails context consistency

- by(u) is a chain / total-order:

  |forall| u: |forall| m, m' |in| by(u): m |le| m' |or| m' |le| m

Enforcement
===========

Reflexivity and anti-symmetry do not need special protocol-level behaviour to
enforce; implementations might check their own correctness with unit tests.

Enforcing transitivity means we must show messages to the user in `topological
order`_. For each incoming m, if any of its parents p |in| pre(m) have not yet
been delivered [#Ndlv]_, we place m in a buffer, and wait for all of pre(m) to
be delivered first before delivering m. This allows us to verify that the
parent references are actually of real messages. To protect against DoS, the
buffer should be limited in size; see the next section for details.

The result is that we deliver all of anc(m) before we deliver m, i.e. the user
sees anc(m) before m. This applies for messages the user sends too, assuming we
set the parents correctly. This achieves transitivity on the local side, but it
is quite hard to detect whether *other* members are doing this. (One option is
to require m to mention *all* of anc(m), but obviously this costs too much
bandwidth.) But earlier, we argued that there is no incentive for users to
cheat this; we will make this assumption going forward.

Enforcing transitive reduction can be done using only information from m and
anc(m). Since messages are only added to the data structure in topological
order, everyone has this information so they can enforce it themselves.
Messages that break this may simply be dropped, with a local UI warning as to
the source. The :ref:`merge algorithm for DAGs <merge-algorithm>` includes a
check that the inputs form an anti-chain, and it may be run on the pre(m) of
every message accepted, including for single-parent messages.

Enforcing total ordering can be done only when someone accepts messages from
both forks, which not everyone else might see. To help this propagate, users
that see this condition, must re-broadcast all messages within both forks to
everyone else, then leave the conversation with a BAIL error message (TODO:
elaborate possible errors) that references both forks. Note that one of the
references may have to be indirect if we already replied to the other fork, to
preserve transitive reduction. We should never need to do this for a triple
fork; bail should be immediate upon attempting to deliver a double fork. It is
not essential that everyone receives this, since lack of future participation
will indicate that something is wrong, but this helps to narrow down the cause.

.. _Topological order: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Topological_sort

.. [#Ndlv] Here, "deliver" is standard distributed-systems terminology, and
    means to make the message available to higher layers for subsequent
    operations, such as displaying in a UI. However, in messaging contexts,
    "deliver" might be confused to mean "remote completion of a send", e.g. as
    in "delivery receipt"; so sometimes we'll use the term "accept" instead.

Detecting transport attacks
---------------------------

By "transport attacks", we mean replays, re-orders, and drops of packets, by an
attacker that can affect the physical communications infrastructure. We assume
that external cryptographic authentication will allow us to detect packets
injected by a non-member.

Detecting replays is easy, assuming that our decryption scheme verify-decrypts
duplicate packets so that they have the same parents (and contents and other
metadata); then this will be deserialised into an already-existing node in our
transcript graph. If we cache the ciphertext (and there is :ref:`reason to
<reliability>`), we don't even need to verify-decrypt it the second time.

Enforcing transitivity is basically an exercise in correcting the order of
messages, so we are already covered there.

For drops, let's consider "causal drops" first - drops of messages that caused
(are *before*) a message we *have* already received. Messages in the delivery
buffer will have three types of parents: those already accepted, those also in
the buffer, and those that haven't been seen yet. For the last case, this is
either because the parent p doesn't exist (the sender is lying), or because the
transport is being unreliable or malicious.

We don't assume the transport is reliable, so we should give it a grace period
within which to expect p to arrive. After this expires, we should assume that
we'll never receive p for whatever reason, emit a UI warning ("referenced
message p didn't arrive on time"), and drop messages that transitively point to
p from the buffer. This is safe even if p turns out to be real and we receive
it later; others' :ref:`reliability <reliability>` schemes will detect this and
resend us the dropped messages. If we do eventually receive p later, we should
cancel the warning, or at least downgrade its severity, based on how timely we
expect the transport to be.

If we never receive p, we cannot know *for sure* whether the sender was lying
or the transport was malicious. In the basic case, there is no incentive for
the sender to lie, but if we just *assume* the transport is malicious (and take
some action A in response to this) then ironically we *give* the sender an
incentive to lie - they can frame the transport to induce us to do A, which may
have unintended consequences. So, we should be careful in how we communicate
this fault to the user, and not imply blame on any party.

Detecting *non-causal drops* - drops of messages not-before a message we've
already received, and therefore we don't see any references to - is more
complex, and we will cover this in :doc:`freshness <03-freshness>`.

If the first message has replay protection (e.g. if it is fresh), we also
inductively gain this for the entire session. This is because each message
contains unforgeable references to previous parent messages, so everything is
"anchored" to the first non-replayable message.

Disadvantages of buffering
--------------------------

Withholding some messages even though they are available to deliver without
their ancestors, may seem like bad user experience. However, delivering them
like this sacrifices ordering and changes the original context of the message.
[#Nhld]_ As mentioned previously, our threat model is that this may be critical
for security; another interpretation is that messages without their ancestors
*are not* what the sender intended, so it doesn't even make any semantic sense
to deliver them. Our resend mechanisms should also reduce the cases in practise
where we must buffer messages.

One interface option is to show a "messages received out-of-order" notice. If
you really must display their contents, you must do this separately from the
main conversation interface, activated manually, and with a strong warning on
the consequences of reading them - they may be fake messages, do not reply to
them, etc etc. TODO: explore this further, with the requirements of SMS.

TODO: more arguments around causal ordering and buffering
- "display immediately" strategy only guarantees to "1-level parent only"; rest of history forgeable
- buffering can be invisible to end-user, so no visible degradation (weak point though)

.. [#Nhld] One major problem is we effectively break transitivity of the parent
    references. By which we mean, even if you somehow implement |le| despite
    having incomplete anc(m) and it passes transitivity tests, semantically
    this will not be true, so your representation will not reflect reality.
    Although these properties may seem abstract and not important to security,
    other more concrete properties that we elaborate on in further chapters,
    depend on them.
